[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger with
today's video we move towards gazing at modern
set theory which is unfortunately fraught
with difficulties logical and conceptual
problems this is a little bit of a painful uh
thing for me to have to do because I'm going
to have to say a lot of negative things I'm
seriously unimpressed with modern set theory
and the approach of modern mathematics towards it
basically I feel that most modern mathematicians
are deliberately not gazing over there in the
corner addressing the very serious essentially
obvious problems with the subject okay so uh
the kinds of problems that we're going to be
looking at very quite considerably but really the
starting point is with the question what exactly
is a set it's important to realize that this
very common question of do infinite sets exist
or not yes or no this is really only one aspect
of the question in fact not necessarily the most
fundamental aspect either the question about
what actually the word set means is actually
the fundamental question it's the fundamental
problem in the subject one of the difficulties
is that the word set is a common word in the
English language and almost everybody has some
kind of intuitive idea because it's a word that's
used out there in the real world in the real world
we find definitions of the word set for example
Miriam Webster gives the definition or one of the
definitions of the set to be a number of things
of the same kind that belong or are used together
the came cambrid dictionary we see that a set is
a group of things that belong together the Oxford
dictionary a group or collection of things that
belong together or resemble one another or are
usually found together there's a coherence there
but we're definitely getting a pretty good idea at
least for ordinary usage in the real world another
very instructive thing to look up is the thesaurus
and this actually is quite interesting in for us
so the thesaurus gives us a whole bunch of near
synonyms to the word set other words which
are interchangeable with set under certain
conditions including collection group Arrangement
Clump multitude batch cluster formation body
host Bunch lineup bundle lot display Menagerie
throng assortment compendium aggregate Ensemble
assemblage class click progression and no doubt
you can think of some more yourselves so one way
of trying to explain to a young person what
a set is is to use some of these other words
so a set of birds is like a group of birds or a
bunch of birds or a multitude of birds so we can
use some of these words to describe what other
words mean and there is a problem of potential
circularity here so you know we could fall into
the Trap of saying well a set is a group and then
if somebody asks us what a group is we say well
a group is a collection and what's a collection
a collection is a menagerie and eventually we get
back to where we started so there's definitely a
little bit of a danger there but nevertheless
it's interesting to realize that this this is
a very common meaning in English as evidenced by
the fact that we have a lot of synonyms for this
word so that's all well and good in ordinary
life we want to take this word and apply it to
mathematics thereby we need to actually make
it much more precise we need to clarify what
does it mean in a mathematical sense this turns
out not to be so easy at all all right so let's
move toward the idea of trying to establish or
investigate whether or not we could actually
give a precise meaning to this word set in the
mathematical context okay so we're not going to
assume that we already have such a definition
very important to make this point okay so we
do not have a definition yet we're looking to see
whether it's possible to create such a definition
and maybe it is and maybe it isn't okay but in
any case there are certain kinds of sets that
we certainly want to end up being included
in our definition for example these kinds
of sets a the set 1 2 3 and this is the usual
notation that we would like to introduce some
sort of curly brackets and the elements or the
objects or the things inside the set separated
by commas and with this important convention that
the actual order of the objects doesn't matter we
can interchange the order and it's still the
same set so the set 1 2 3 is the same as the
set 213 which is the same as a set 312 and so on
here's a set B with a single element the element
is a number the number 47 here's a set C which
is a little bit more complicated it has three
objects in it as you can tell by the fact there
are these two commas so this is one Element this
is another element and this is another element
but this element here is itself a set consisting
of two numbers this this one here is also a set
consisting of one number and this is not a set
just a single number so probably we do ultimately
want to be able to consider things like this and
call them sets so we want sets to be objects
which can be included as elements of other sets
so I've said that we want a set to be unordered
doesn't matter if we permute the entries but we
only want one of Any Given element we do not want
to allow multiple copies of the same element in
a set so for example this thing D equals the set
1 31 2 is officially not a set because there are
two ones okay so that's sort of the idea uh that
we want sets to have distinct elements it turns
out to be actually useful we will talk about
objects like this they are more usually called
multisets kind of an extension of the idea of a
set very important actually in applications but
the set notion proper is going to exclude this
possibility so if we see something like this
written down we'll say no no that is not a set
informally something else that we want is that
the objects in the set in other words the elements
of the set should be well defined mathematical
objects so closely related to the question
of what is a set is the question what do we
mean by a mathematical object for example are
any of the following sets so here's a set F
which consists of Fred okay Fred is an English
word usually referring to the name of a person
there are many people called Fred does this make
sense is this a legitimate set well maybe it is
in certain contexts like in ordinary life you
know might have a committee and the committee
has one person on it and that's Fred and okay so
Fred is constituting a set in this case but do we
want this kind of thing to be a mathematical set
that's a a question how about something like this
G equal 1 12 + 1/3 okay this is a mathematical
thing but what kind of a thing it actually is
is a good question it's a arithmetical expression
involving rational numbers with an operation and
we can certainly evaluate that to a rational
number especially if we know a little bit of
rational number arithmetic namely 56 so this
thing evaluates to 56 but are we allowed to
write just this expression or do we really need
to write 56 that's kind of a question about what
kind of mathematical objects we're going to
be allowing for example this thing here uh
the set consisting of two to the three where
the three exponent is written on the left now
for most of us we look at this and say well it
looks kind of mathematical but what does that
mean if it was 2 to the 3 we would know what
that means but this thing here is unfamiliar
even though it looks kind of mathematical so are
we going to allow something like this that sort
of looks mathematical but maybe doesn't
have a pre-existing mathematical meaning
another question is are we going to consider
sets with an infinite number of elements of
course this is a very fundamental question are
we going to restrict ourselves to things that
we can write down completely or are we going
to allow three dots are we going to say that
the set X consisting of 1 over 1 comma 1
over two comma 1 over 3 comma 1 over4 dot
dot dot is a legitimate set the there's
clearly some potential debate about that
so here's another example something that's
potentially ambiguous the set of all possible
equations it's kind of ambiguous we don't
really know exactly the realm of what an
equation is equation could refer to all kinds of
different things and all possible equations well
you know that that's a huge thing is it going
to be a legitimate object of our mathematical
theories it's a question we've had quite a lot
of experience in introducing different kinds
of mathematical objects and we've seen that
invariably we have to address the question of
when two mathematical objects are the same when
are two integers the same when are two rational
numbers the same when are two Pol numbers the same
Etc so the same story is going to apply here to
our set theory whatever a set turns out to be we
are going to want to ask ask the question how do
we tell if two sets A and B are equal what is
the definition of equality of sets and how do
we actually tell whether two sets are equal so
for example here are two relatively small sets
A and B you can see the elements there's some
numbers and a few letters as well we might ask
is a equal to B and you can see that it's not
so easy to answer this question especially if
these lists were considerably longer it would be
very challenging to answer this kind of question
because of the unordered aspect of the Set uh
makes it um very challenging we basically have
to order the sets if they're long sets in order
to be able to answer this kind of question so so
computationally this is a very naughty problem but
there's another sort of aspect of this question
how can we tell if two mathematical objects which
are inside the sets are themselves the same so in
order to be able to tell that these two sets
are the same we'd have to say oh this is a 21
here and oh there's a 21 here and these two 21s
are the same in this case they're evidently the
same but what if we're representing this 21 in
a different fashion from this 21 we have to be
able to recognize that this mathematical object
and this mathematical object are either the same
or not the same in order to be able to tell that
the sets are the same and not the same so we have
to have mastered equality for all the mathematical
objects that we're going to be considering in our
set theory in order to talk meaningfully about
the equality of sets for example the set C set C
is 3 * 7 and then the smallest prime greater than
18 and then 17 = 13 that looks like an equation
okay is an equation allowed to be an element
of a set well maybe okay here's another set uh
consisting of 19 and another equation 13 = 17
and another arithmetical expression 22 - 1 so
we can ask are these two sets the same and you'll
probably see that we probably want them to be the
same because 3 * 7 is the same as 22 - 1 and the
smallest Prime bigger than 18 is is in fact 19 and
this equation is I suppose pretty well the same
I suppose as this equation but clearly to make
that very precise we need to have a notion before
that of when two equations are the same of whether
we're going to allow this representation of the
number to be the same as this representation of a
number and what kinds of arithmetical Expressions
we're going to be allowing inside our sets you can
imagine this sort of from the point of view of
a computer scientist who's trying to create a
mathematical program that deals effectively with
sets and if we're going to allow arithmetical
Expressions as elements of sets or statements
like this or equations that programmer is going
to have to have prior sort of sub routines that
deal with all those kinds of objects and deals
with all the kinds of potential inequalities or
equalities involved with the various types of
mathematical objects that they're considering
it's a sort of massive programming problem I
suppose if we want our sets to be very general
kinds of mathematical objects and how are we
going to deal with sets whose elements cannot
be specified but only described so for example
consider this set e which has three elements the
first one is the smallest Prime bigger than 20
to the 20 to the 20 to the 20 to the 20 the next
element is the smallest equation that will never
be written down and the third element is the set
of all sets with exactly one element so is this a
legitimate set we have to ponder what what are
these things I mean the smallest Prime bigger
than this number it's the same kind of question
as the smallest Prime bigger than 18 but we can
all figure out what the smallest Prime bigger than
18 is none of us are anywhere close to being able
to figure out what the smallest Prime bigger than
this number is so far far beyond our computational
abilities so is this a legitimate thing to write
down are we are we really writing down something
that makes sense are we allowing ourselves to
write down descriptions of mathematical objects
as opposed to actual specifications of those
objects and this the smallest equation that
will never be written down okay sounds a little
bit uh sort of circularly difficult okay there's
all kinds of equations some of them will never be
written down okay then of all the equations that
can never be written down there's the smallest
one maybe and so that's the one we're talking
about all right so by definition we can't write
it down but we want to include it in the set
you are we are we going allow ourselves that
and this the set of all sets with exactly one
element okay so there are sets with one element
there are many sets with just one element and
how about the set of all sets with one element
is that the legitimate mathematical object we
can certainly never write it down but we can sort
of describe it in this loose kind of way is that
allowed what about self- referential sets
so suppose I say that let's consider the
set F which is equal to the set f is this
a legitimate kind of thing so if I replace
this F with what it is namely f is equals
the set F then I write f equals the set of
the set F and I can replace this F with the
same thing and I find that f equals the set
of the set of the set F how about taking the
limit as we like to do in modern mathematics
right we like to take the limits we like to
go to Infinity so why don't we just go to
Infinity we carry on this process to infinity
and we get this kind of expression for f it's
a bracket another bracket inside another bracket
inside another bracket inside and whole bunch of
dots does this make sense is this a legitimate
usage of three dots well I know you all know what
I think about such things but what do you think
another natural question is should we allow a
set with zero elements are we going to include
the idea of a set like G which is just a pair
of brackets with nothing inside so I remind you
that the number zero hasn't been around you know
that long the ancient Greeks didn't have zero
so basically Hindu Arabic uh production around
500 AD in India and so there's something a little
bit sophisticated about the idea of zero and so
there's something a little bit sophisticated
about the idea of a set with zero elements
does that really count it's a question I know
most of us are quite used to this but perhaps
it does take some getting used to and it's not
entirely clear that it should be the case that
empty sets are included along the same lines a
little bit more um exploratory how about sets
with a negative number of elements You could argue
well if you're going to allow zero elements why
not include minus1 elements so here's how we take
the union of sets the union of set one two with
the set three is set 1 2 3 how about the union of
the set one two with the set consisting of Min -1
twos so following a counting practice let's write
you know a negative number of twos as a bracket
with a two so this means not negative -2 but means
there's a two there but there's a negative number
of twos does that mean anything and if so is it
the case that if we take the union of these two
that the two somehow perhaps cancel okay this
is very questionable but one might imagine that
some beginners in set theory might think well
maybe we could have such a theory if we take
Fred Union sort of anti Fred do we get the empty
set I don't know at least it's possible Right it
might be consistent for somebody to create such
a set theory and they would then say yeah my set
theory is better than yours because I include sets
with1 elements not just zero or positive elements
okay now we come to a much more serious uh issue
okay which is highly problematic when it comes to
thinking about infinite sets this question about
Choice versus algorithmic constructions of sets
so the same kinds of issues that we encounter
dealing with infinite decimals with dedicant
cuts and Koshi sequences raise their heads here in
the set theoretical world are we allowed to create
a set by making an infinite number of choices for
example let me do that for you here okay I'm going
to create a set C it's going to be an infinite
set and the first element is going to be 19 and
the next element is going to be 20 and then maybe
I'll choose minus 131 and then I might choose um
51 over 49 and then I just have to make sure that
I do something that's different from what I've
done before maybe I'll add hey I'll add a triangle
that's SS cool and now I'm going to add the letter
R and now I'm going to add the letter uh you
know maybe T and now how about uh 13 squar and
I'm going to keep going there's three dots there
okay that three dots of course represents that I'm
going to carry on making choices past the end of
the month past the end of the decade past the edge
of time I'm going to carry on to Infinity making
choices making choices keeping on adding more and
more stuff to Infinity is that a legitimate
mathematical object the set C that wildberger
creates as opposed to that there's sort of an
algorithmic approach to a set so I'm going to
create another set using an algorithm so here's
the algorithm so the algorithm Step One is insert
a one okay I to inserted one and step two is
insert what you've built so far and repeat okay
so what I built so far is a set uh with just one
element so I'm going to insert that set that I've
created so far which is that's what I've created
so far right I'm inserting that okay and then I'm
going to repeat this so now I'm going to look to
see what I have I now have a set with two elements
I'm going to insert that set into what I already
have okay so that was the set one and the set one
okay I'm just inserted that and now at the next
step I'm going to insert what I already have which
is a set consisting of one the set one the set
one set one I guess I have to end it there okay
the brain starting to hurt if I have to do this
too often but it's reasonably coherent instruction
computer could go on and keep on adding more
and more elements and we could carry on this
way so this is a construction of an infinite
set if you believe such things and this is a
construction of an infinite set if you believe
such things and a natural question is well if
you are going to believe in this religion I mean
this theory of uh infinite sets are you going to
think about sets as being defined in terms of
choice or are you going to think in terms of
sets defined as algorithms or are you going to
mix and match allow occasionally these kinds and
occasionally these kinds okay so whenever you're
dealing with infinite processes this question of
Choice versus algorithm is never far away you can
try to avoid it and not think about it but the
question is still there are you thinking about
this kind of infinite process or this kind of
infinite process and there's a big difference as
we've already seen with our discussion with real
numbers between these two ways of thinking about
things the theory of sets is quite different if
you think about them this way or if you think
about them this way they're very very different
theories so which which one do you want there's
another aspect of this Choice versus algorithm
kind of uh dichotomy that I also want to draw to
your attention that we can ask the same kinds of
question with regard to nesting rather than
listing so instead of thinking about a set as
being a listing of things we can also think in
terms of nesting let me give you an example so
here's a set R okay it's the set consisting of
a and b have I defined a set with this well it
probably depends on what A and B are if a and
b are variables and you know what a variable
is then perhaps you could say yes the set R is
complete as it stands but if I tell you that A
and B are not variables but they are in fact
sets then you probably have a right to ask
well what are they let me tell you what they are
so a is the set c d and B happens to be the set
EF and what are C D E and F Well suppose
that I tell you that they also are sets
so now you can see that in order to Define r
not only do I need to Define What A and B are
I've done that there but now I'm further
more obliged to tell you what CDE E and
F are so maybe I could go and do that I
could say all right C ALS uh say x y z
and d = f and E = uh one 2 R and F equals
oh what letters haven't we used yet K L
M and you can see that I can kind of keep on
doing this right and I could have either a
choice point of view or an algorithmic point of
view to do doing this you may have thought that
there was a pattern when I went from here to here
but from here to here it looks like my pattern is
much less clear it maybe it's the case that I'm
just making things up as I go along that would
be like a choice point of view so at each stage
I'm allowed to take the undefined object so far
and just create a new definition of what it is
in terms of yet more undefined objects and I can
keep going like this to Infinity that would be
one point of view another point of view would
be saying well we'd rather prefer an algorithmic
approach to this kind of construction that there's
some computer program that actually you know tells
us how to go from one level of this nested bunch
of sets to the next level and finally another
kind of question that we might ask about this
sort of fledgling set theory that we're looking
towards creating is are we going to allow sets
given by conditions which we can't check or
can't easily check for example P the set of
n such that n is an odd perfect number so a
perfect number is a number like six if you
take the sum of its divisors 1 2 and three
you get six itself so it's called a perfect
number 28 is also a perfect number so there are
perfect numbers known but they all happen to be
even and it's a famous unsolved problem in number
theory about whether there are or are not any odd
perfect numbers so nobody knows so I can write
down this statement but have I really defined a
set or not nobody can say whether this is the
empty set or whether it has some elements in
it and if it has elements how many there are
we don't know so is this a valid kind of set
all right so we've listed at least some of
the issues that we would expect to have to
deal with have to confront and sort of examine
if we're going to create a theory of sets it's
not so easy at all it's not so straightforward
there's lots of decisions that have to be made
that we're going to accept this and not accept
that and this is okay and that's okay but we have
to have a prior theory of this and that and so
on okay not easy at all interestingly modern set
theory started with a very particular individual
at a very particular time this was George caner
a German mathematician who lived from 1845 to
1918 he was a very courageous and ultimately
tragic figure in the history of mathematics but
had a very huge influence on the development of
mathematics so his story is intimately inter
woven to this story of set theory in the 1870s
he clarified this idea of set which he then
went on to develop the set theory so in German
the word for set is me which actually had been
introduced by Bolzano that term uh a few decades
earlier so here's the original German definition
of Cantor here is English translation a set is
a gathering together into a hole of definite
distinct objects of our perception or of our
thought which are called elements of the set
if you look back to our first slide it's not so
much different from the colloquial definitions
that we find in the various dictionaries these
days is it sufficient to deal with the various
issues and problems that we've suggest suggested
or part of the story well I don't think so
and probably caner realized this himself that
this definition is just not precise enough to say
precisely what a set really is and this turned out
to be a major issue it turned out that in fact yes
this definition was too ambiguous and not precise
enough and it couldn't support a consistent Theory
the the theory that eventually developed from this
basis was ultimately logically flawed because of
the weakness of the actual definition and I hope
you can see from the previous discussion in this
video why this definition is is weak because it
really doesn't address any of the natural issues
that even a beginner student might easily ask
about this notion so my opinion is and I'll sort
of lay out my cards on the table here is that
the term set is too General and open-ended to be
pinned down with a proper mathematical definition
it's too ambitious to hope to be able to Define
properly and clearly and carefully the word set
in the way that we're trying to do the term set
like the terms number function sequence statement
formula this is a meta mathematical notion it's a
concept coming from the English language or from
our ordinary language this is a metamathematical
notion from ordinary language which although it
has a reasonable meaning rough meaning in ordinary
language when we try to bring it into mathematics
all of these terms just are too broad and their
corners and boundaries are too ambiguous to allow
us to say clearly what we're talking about in
mathematics we need to say exactly clearly and
logically what the fundamental words mean this is
a prime obligation that we have we cannot avoid it
but all is not lost okay so it turns out that set
theory in fact is a very rich Theory it's a very
rich and fascinating theory in fact but to get at
it we need to lower our expectations and restrict
our approach by doing that we can introduce more
limited versions of these Concepts in more precise
logical and constrained settings so by being less
ambitious we can be more precise and we can in
fact create a reasonable kind of introduction to
set theory so what I plan on doing is instead of
immediately critiquing the modern set theory which
is in sore need of critiquing but I'm going to put
that off a little bit and I'm going to show you a
more logical and careful approach to the subject
so we're going to build up the beginnings of
a proper theory of sets albeit in a much more
restrictive and precise domain and then we'll
have some good basis for going on and having a
look at what actually is out there with the 20th
century theory of the set theory which is highly
problematic all right so I hope you'll join me
for that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening